Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined for a 5th time by Dr.
David Benatar. He is Emeritus professor of philosophy at
the University of. Cape Town and today we're going
to talk about his book The Human Predicament A
Candid Guide to Life's Biggest Question. So Dr. Bennettar,
welcome back to the show. It's always a big
pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you very much. Nice to be back. I
can't believe it's the 5th time.
Yes, it is. The first one was almost 7
years ago.
Wow, wow.
OK, so to get into the topic and before
we get into your book exactly or the questions
you explore there, uh, I would like to start
with this question. So from a Philosophical perspective, which
I imagine will be at least slightly different from
the way people commonly use these terms. What is
pessimism and what is optimism?
I think there are different ways of using the
term philosophically, and I do spend some time in
the book clarifying how I use the term. And
it does differ from the ways people sometimes use
them. So, sometimes when people use the word optimism,
they refer to an excessively rosy view, and they
use the word pessimism to refer to an excessively
dark view. And I want to disentangle the excessive
part from the positive or the negative view. And
so I describe optimistic views as positive views and
pessimistic views as negative views, and then there'd be
a separate question about whether they are excessively so
or aptly so.
Mhm. Right, and so I mean what is the
human predicament? What do you mean by that? And
of course since it's the human predicament we're talking
about here, how does it differ from the predicament
of other animals or the animal predicament more generally?
The human predicament, I think, refers to the position
we find ourselves in where, uh, life is hard,
it lacks sufficient meaning, uh, but death is not
a solution. And so you're really caught between a
rock and a hard place. Once you've come into
existence, you are now in a predicament from which
there is no escape. It can be alleviated to
some condi to some extent, but it can't be
avoided. The human predicament has something, some distinctive features
to it. Uh, FOR example, I think as far
as we know, humans are the only creatures that
are aware of, let's say, certain kinds of meaninglessness
in their lives. Uh, HUMANS certainly are aware of
their future deaths. Maybe some other animals are aware
of that too, although we don't understand just quite
the extent and the nature of that understanding. And
so there are some features of the human predicament
that I think are unique, but that doesn't mean
to say that the human predicament is worse in
all possible ways than, uh, all animal predicaments. Certainly,
some animals, most especially those that we bring into
existence in order to eat and which, uh, who,
who are reared on factory farms, these animals have
a quality of life that is much, much lower
than many, many human beings' quality of life. And
so that's a way in which their predicament is
worse than certainly many humans, but perhaps not all
humans.
Would you extend at least some aspects of this
predicament to all sentient life?
Yes, uh, that, uh, that is the case. I,
I think, as you will be aware from some
of my earlier work that I think it's a
harm to any sentient being to be brought into
existence. And, uh, it's also a harm to cause
a sentient being to cease to exist. That is
to say, to kill a sentient being or for
the sentient being just to die naturally. And so,
there is a sense, yes, in which all sentient
beings find themselves in a predicament, although the contours
of that predicament will differ from species to species
and individual to individual.
When it comes to this predicament we find ourselves
in as humans, do you think that it is
inevitable that people will get across it, that people
will know at least to some extent that they
are in this predicament. Or should we tell them
and and I mean if do you think that
people should know or should be told that they
are in this predicament if they just so happen
to not be aware of it for some reason?
I certainly think it's possible for people not to
be aware of their predicament or at least not
fully aware of it. Perhaps there's some level at
which many, many people are aware of it, but
they're go into denial and they try to find
ways of denying it in order to cope with
it. And I do, I think early in the
book, engage in this question about whether once you
go about puncturing people's delusions, Because that could cause
a lot of subjective unhappiness. And My concern is
that although it is better for the being who's
in the predicament to not be aware of the
predicament and be in denial about it, that can
actually be quite dangerous in terms of other beings.
So beings of that kind that are in those
kinds of delusions, let's say are more likely to
reproduce and therefore more likely to reproduce the predicament
by creating more beings in that predicament. And they
might be insensitive in some ways to the suffering
of others because they're not fully recognizing the predicament.
And so I think there's some value in Telling
people about it, but I also think it matters
how and when you tell them. Uh, I, I
don't think that one should go up to people
on the streets and try to spread the bad
news the way some people try to spread the,
uh, the good news. But I think writing a
book that people can pick up or not pick
up as they see fit, as they choose, uh,
is among the acceptable ways to convey this message
to people.
But do you think that there are perhaps cases
or situations where it would be more moral for
us to protect people from knowing about their predicament?
I mean, I, I don't know. Perhaps there are
some extreme situations where perhaps we can just let
people. DELUDE themselves in a way or cope with
their situation in ways that are positive for them.
I agree. I think there certainly are. And one
kind of case that comes to mind is somebody's
on their deathbed, and they may be speaking to
you about, let's say, their belief in the afterlife.
And that may be bringing them some comfort in
the moment. Uh, I think it would just be
cruel in that moment to say, there are very
good reasons for thinking there is no afterlife, and
this is it. You're going to die, you're going
to enter into oblivion imminently. That would just be
cruel to say something of that kind. And there's
really no good to be derived from. Breaking the
news as it were, to somebody in that condition.
It's not like their optimism is going to Do
much harm to anybody else at that point. It's
bringing them some comfort, and I think we should
just leave, leave it alone.
So of course this question or these issues surrounding
how our human predicament ties a lot to the
meaning or lack thereof of our lives. So what
does it mean for life to be meaningful?
Again, I think there's a lot of philosophical disagreement
about what it is for life to be meaningful.
Uh, I sympathize with those views that See meaning
as having some purpose or point or significance. And
so, typically that would involve having some impact, uh,
pos and presumably a positive impact if what you're
looking for is positive meaning, because there can also
be a negative meaning. To have some positive impact
on, on others that can make a life meaningful,
and I do think that our lives can Generate
some meaning. We can create some meaning in our
lives. So I don't have so pessimistic a view
that I think that meaning is entirely impossible, but
I do think there are different perspectives from which
one's life can have or lack meaning. And I
think it's most likely to, our lives are most
likely to have meaning in very narrow circles. So,
almost everybody. Has some meaning to people adjacent to
them, to their family members, to their friends. They
have some, they, their life has some point with
respect to people in those circles. There's some people
for whom their lives have a broader effect, a
broader meaning. Some people will have an effect on
all of humanity, a positive effect on all of
humanity. One of the examples I gave is Uh,
so Alexander Fleming, who discovers penicillin, and this now
has a very beneficial effect for millions of human
beings. Even after he dies. And so those are
ways in which lives can sometimes have very extensive,
what I call terrestrial meanings. But I think that
our lives never have any meaning from a broader
perspective than that. In other words, if we adopt
something like a cosmic perspective, no lives in fact
have meaning from that perspective.
OK, tell us a little bit more about that.
Uh, WHAT do you mean exactly by cosmic meaning
and terrestrial meaning? Uh, HOW do you distinguish one
from the other?
Well, terrestrial really refers to earthly meaning. So we
are inhabitants of Earth, and as I said, we
could have meaning with regard to just a few
people in our immediate surroundings, or we might have
a broader meaning, uh, that could be felt, let's
say, around the earth. Now, there can also be
degrees of meaning of this kind. So somebody might
have a very small positive global impact, or they
may have a very large positive, uh, global impact.
But I don't think that there can be any
meaning from a broader perspective. Now, not in principle.
I mean, let's imagine that the universe was In
was inhabited by other species on other, on other
planets, and things that people did here had significance
in those other planets. Well, then there might be
some small quantity of, of positive cosmic meaning. Uh,
BUT on the understanding that there are no sentient
beings elsewhere, or at least that we're having no
impact on those sentient beings elsewhere, I think that
cosmic meaning is absent. Another possible way of having
cosmic meaning is if there were a God. WHO
would have a kind of cosmic perspective and if
things that you do did matter to God, then
that might be a way you could get it.
I just don't think that there is a God
who Uh, would give that kind of meaning to
our lives.
Yes, I'm also an atheist, but I was wondering,
since you mentioned that possibility, which I don't even
think is a possibility, but anyway, let's consider it
just for the sake of the argument. If there
was such a God and created us as human
beings as a special kind of creation in the
universe, do you think that could imbue. Our lives
with cosmic meaning.
Yes, it might be a small dose of it,
depending on just how important this purpose was for
which God had created human beings and also more
particularly individual human beings because he might have a
grand purpose for the species as a whole, and
yet any individual human being is just a cog
in that whole purpose, or it might be that
God has some very important purpose for each individual.
Now, it's very, very hard for me to fathom
what that might be. Uh, BUT, uh, if there
were such a thing, then I think that would
be a form of cosmic meaning. There'd then be
a further question about how significant it was, how
big it is, how big the meaning is.
And and of course, there's uh we can establish
a link here with religion more broadly. What do
you think about what we could call, of course
as atheists, perhaps other people would call it or
use other terms, but what do you think about
coping mechanisms that people resort to like the ones
provided by religion which in their own subjective understanding
provide their lives with meaning.
So, I do think this is part of the
explanation of the enduring feature of religion is that
it does provide a coping mechanism, and one of
the coping mechanisms that it can provide is the
sense that your life has a purpose beyond the
immediate. And perhaps even some cosmic meaning. That I
think is certainly something that would attract people to
religious ideas. I am not of the view that
religion is the sole preserve of, uh, delusions. In
other words, I think that there are plenty of
secular delusions, uh, secular optimistic. Mechanisms that people try
to employ in order to make their lives feel
better or more purposeful, and I would be equally
critical of those.
Uh, YES, and will, I will ask you about
those more secular theodicies in a bit, but, uh,
and then I, I mean, and this is because
also I'm interested in, uh, evolutionary biology. I I
interviewed, uh, and interview many evolutionary biologists on the
show. And sometimes we hear from them that life
as a as a sort of purpose and that
purpose is linked to reproduction and that in a
way makes life meaningful. What do you think about
that kind of argument?
I think that is one of those circular theodicies.
So, first of all, the word purpose, uh, presupposes
some purportive agent. And if you take a strict
interpretation of these evolutionary psychology views, there's no purportive
agent that is endowing us with any of these
attributes. There's just a mechanical process that's going on.
Uh, AND it may be that we, in some
sense, fulfill the purposes of our parents. Who either
wittingly or unwittingly spread their genes, uh, and created
us. Uh, BUT that doesn't look like the right
kind of purpose. In other words, people who are
wanting to know what is the meaning of life.
And you would say to them, well, it's your
parents or your parents' genes mechanism for for for
spreading. That's the purpose of your life, is to
keep that gene pool uh alive and uh, and,
and, and active. That's not the kind of thing
that, uh, that people are looking for when they
want to know what their lives have meaning, and
I think they're quite right to want a lot
more than that. The philosopher Robert Nozick did imagine
that perhaps there's some scenario in which our purpose
is to provide food for intergalactic travelers. In other
words, they would, intergalactic travelers would feast on us.
Now, that could be a kind of cosmic purpose,
but it doesn't look like a comforting one. In
other words, if you're toiling in life and you're
struggling to know what the meaning of it is
and somebody would reveal to you that it is,
that your body will eventually become food for intergalactic
travelers, you don't say, oh, OK, well, that makes
it all worthwhile.
Yes, and I don't know if you agree with
this point I'm about to make or not, but
when it comes to this argument coming from Biologists
and evolutionary biologists, more specifically, when they say that
the purpose or your purpose is to propagate your
genes, I mean to disseminate your genes, I also
have, I guess, two different problems with that argument.
The first one. To do with identity, so it's
not like we ourselves are our genes. There's a
difference in terms of identity between what we are
as humans and our genes. We can't just reduce
ourselves to our genes. And the other problem I
have with that is. THAT are they really your
genes because half of them came from your mother,
the other half from your father, and you can
go back generation after generation, and I mean those
genes do not belong to one person exactly. I
mean what do you think about that?
It reminds me of the quip about a chicken
being an egg's way of making another egg. Uh,
SO I don't, look, I'm not a scientist. I
don't know all the details. My sense is that
mitochondrial DNA does, uh, continue through the maternal line,
so that might remain, uh, consistent. Uh, BUT I'm
just not sure how much those technical scientific questions
need to be answered in order to, uh, address
the con the claim that's being made. I think
it's sufficient to say that even if we had
that kind of purpose, That would not be the
desired kind of purpose. That isn't what we're looking
for when we seek our lives to be meaningful.
Of course, the problems are going to be greater
if it's just scientifically invalid, but even if it's
scientifically valid, it's not providing us with, uh, the
kind of meaning we want and need.
OK, so this is another argument that I sometimes
hear from biologists, particularly that sounds like a a
semi-religious argument. That because life in the universe seems
to be so unlikely and particularly intelligent lifelike like
we are, that it has some meaning that our
lives have some meaning because of that. What is
your reply to that kind of argument?
Well, I do engage a view like that in
the book and, uh, respond to it in in
quite some detail, but I don't think that rarity
is, uh, the, is what is what can give
something value by itself because all kinds of terrible
things can be rare, and they don't become positively
valuable just because they're rare. So, I, I'm just
not impressed by an argument of that kind. I
think it is a kind of desperate attempt to
find some meaning, but it's, uh, it's not doing
what it's meant to do, I don't think.
And do you think that when we are evaluating
whether life is meaningful or not, we can just
ignore the cosmic perspective and focus exclusively on the
terrestrial perspective.
I think you can do so. The question is
to what extent you ought to do so. Uh,
I'm certainly not recommending that people spend all their
time dwelling on the absence of any cosmic meaning.
I think that's gonna be a recipe for making
your life more miserable and for your inability to
generate whatever kind of terrestrial meaning that you can.
So, I think it's entirely reasonable to be aware
of and attentive to the absence of cosmic meaning
while you do whatever you can to generate the
meaning that you can generate.
And of course I mean I guess that at
least partially you've already answered this question, but someone
might ask why should we even care about whether
life has any meaning or not? I mean, can't
we just live without asking or caring about that
question?
So, what I find strange about that question is
that It seems to be a kind of sour
grapes response because once a kind of meaning is
impossible, then they say, well, let's just not bother
about that. But it's in the nature of meaning
that we tend to think that more of it
is better than less of it. So, let's imagine
that the only meaning in your life was what
you meant to, let's say, a sibling that you
have. Nobody else in the world cared about you.
Nothing else that you did mattered to anybody. It
was only to a single person. And you wanted
more than that. You wanted your life to be
more meaningful than simply to one other person. They'd
say, well, that's entirely reasonable, and if you can
generate some of that additional meaning perhaps by entering
into other relationships, doing other things that are valuable,
then you ought to do that. Uh, BUT why
should we draw the line at desired meaning at
the point where it, it ceases to be possible?
Uh, THAT drawing it at that very convenient point
looks like sour grapes. It looks like saying, whatever
is beyond my reach, whatever I can't actually obtain,
no longer is desirable to obtain. And there's something
that seems to be defective about that. If you
think that more meaning is better than less meaning,
then there should in principle be no limit. Now,
maybe you can have too much of a good
thing, maybe that's possible, but I've not seen anybody
have that with regard to meaning. You could have
too much dessert. In other words, you have so
much dessert that it now ceases to be a
good thing and becomes a bad thing. But meaning
doesn't seem to be of that kind. The, the
more you can get seems the better and certainly
much more than most people do get.
So I, I want to get now into a
topic that you also explore in another one of
your books, Better Never to Have Been, which we've
already talked about on the show. But of course
when we talk about the human predicament we have
to talk about quality of life, suffering, and so
on. So which aspects do you think are the
ones that we should evaluate when it comes to
our quality of life as human beings?
I'm not sure I'm understanding your question exactly. Are
you asking me about the relationship between quality in
life and meaning of life, or are you asking
me what constitutes quality of life?
I'm asking what constitutes quality of life.
So, I don't have a settled view on that.
Uh, IN both those books, I did examine the
three most popular kinds of views about what constitutes
quality of life. The one is a hedonistic view,
which thinks that it consists purely in positive mental
states and the absence of negative mental states. And,
uh, then there are desire satisfaction views that think
the quality of life. IS dependent on the extent
to which your desires are satisfied. And it is
important to say here that we're not speaking there
simply about subjective satisfaction. It also includes the objective
satisfaction of your desire. When something that you want,
you actually get, whether or not you know that
you've got it. And the third kind of view
is what's called an objective list theory. Where quality
of life depends on the extent to which you
have all the things on the objective list of
goods and lack things that are on the objective
list of bads. And the argument that I make
in both those books is that irrespective of which
of those views you have about quality of life,
we should think that the quality of our life
is much worse than most people think it is.
So, the specific question you're asking me is not
one that I think I have to answer in
order to make the point that the quality of
our lives, is much worse than we think it
is.
And why I mean, on what grounds do you
argue that our quality of life in general is
much worse than people tend to think it is?
Well, it does depend on which view of quality
of life you take, but if we take, for
example, the hedonistic view, I think there's good reason
for thinking that there's more pain than pleasure, and
some of the data points for reaching that conclusion
are that the worst pains are worse than the
best pleasures are good. That there is such a
thing as chronic pain, but there's no such thing
as, uh, chronic pleasure. So these are the kinds
of considerations that I think we can employ. They
don't give us a precise reckoning of how much
good and bad there is, but they do provide
us with good reason for thinking that there is,
in the course of a lifespan, more bad than
good. That doesn't mean to say there's more bad
than good now, but Uh, over a lifetime, there
would be.
But don't you think there's at least. To that
to some extent these kinds of judgments about quality
of life and about there being more good or
bad things in life, more suffering or more pleasure,
are subjective.
Well, that kind of argument is most plausible on
the hedonistic view because that does reduce quality of
life to subjective states. But even there, I think
it's quite clear that people can be mistaken. Uh,
AND there's good psychological evidence for suggesting that they
are. You, you might not be able to be
mistaken about whether you are now having a pleasurable
or a painful state. But if you're asked to
recollect the pleasures and pains of the past, there's
good evidence that people tend to recall more of
the good and under-recall the, the bad. And that's
gonna make their assessment now about The historic levels
of good and bad as unreliable. And you can
be mistaken as a result. Sorry, go ahead.
Uh NO, I was just going to ask you,
but can't the opposite also happen, for example, if
someone suffers from depression, can't they have the opposite
kind of bias of perhaps er remembering more the
bad aspects of their. Lives are interpreting them as
bad as opposed to the good aspects of their
lives.
That's certainly possible, and I do recognize that. I've
said as much. I think there are people who
have too dark a view, who are too pessimistic,
who are depressed out of proportion to reality. In
other words, they're more depressed than reality should render
them. Uh, BUT I just don't think that's the
dominant view. The psychological evidence suggests that most people
are susceptible to an optimism bias, but that's not
to say that there are not many people who
have the opposite bias. They've got too pessimistic a
view.
So you think that and now talking from an
objective perspective that in human life there is more
bad than good.
I do think so. The claim you've just made
is ambiguous between human life as a whole and
any individual human life, but I do think that
it's true on both of those interpretations.
Mhm. So, uh, let me ask you now about,
uh, what in the book you call secular theodicies
or particularly secular optimistic theodesis. Like for example, saying
that bad things in life are necessary or more
specifically that bad things in life are necessary in
order to appreciate the good things. I mean, do
you think that bad things are really necessary in
life for for for those kinds of purposes that
people refer to?
Well, I think there's an ambiguity there in the
necessity. So one question you could be making is,
given the psychological construct of people, they're not going
to appreciate the good things unless they have the
bad things. But another interpretation is to say, could
there be a kind of being that was not
so psychologically constituted? In other words, a kind of
being who could appreciate the good things, uh, without
experiencing the bad things. So, those are two interpretations
of the necessity condition. That you've mentioned. And I
wanna say, really on I, it, it, it, if,
if you require suffering in order to experience, really
experience the good, it would have been better if
you'd not been that kind of being. And so,
this is a worse kind of existence than a
kind of existence where you don't need to have
the bad things in order to experience the good
things. I also wonder, even on its own terms,
whether we need to have quite as much suffering
in the world in order to produce the good
things. It seems sort of a little perverse if
you've got to have Mass starvation and poverty and
millions of people dying of cancer and people taking
their own lives because they're so depressed that you've
gotta have all of that evil in order for
you to be deriving satisfaction from your first, uh,
helping of dessert.
Right, right. What about the secular theodicy that claims
that there are constraints on how good a human
life can be while still being a human life?
I think that that fetishizes the importance of a
life being a human life. So, let's think, let's
say about longevity. We, we live much longer than
mice do, even in, in the wild. And A
mouse's lifespan is really rather short. It's a year
or two, as I recall. MAYBE slightly mistaken about
that, but it's something like 1 year or 2.
And you can imagine a kind of Murian philosopher
saying, well, you shouldn't really be judging the quality
of mice, mice, mice's lives by human standards. You
shouldn't be pointing to those humans that live for
70, 80, 90 years and saying, look how bad
it is uh to be a mouse because we
wouldn't be mice if we lived much longer. Now,
of course, there's one question about whether we, whether
they really wouldn't be mice because if they had
all the other features of being mice, but somehow
they could live for much longer, my money would
be that they are still mice. But even if
that alteration in lifespan meant some kind of alteration
in the species, but these beings actually lived longer
and better lives, I would say it's much better
to be a trance mouse than a mouse. And
I would say something similar about a human being,
that if extending our lifespan while not increasing the
amount of evil within one's life, you know, there's,
the amount of harm in one's life, if you
could do that, if you could go on for
youthful vigor for 500 years rather than youthful vigor
just for 10 or 12 years, then I think
that would be a better thing even if we
cease to be distinctly human.
So do you have an opinion on transhumanism and
the suggestion that perhaps we could try as best
as we can to eliminate suffering from human life?
Do you think that if we could achieve such
a goal, it would contribute to the betterment of
our human predicament?
I think it would be better if we could
reduce suffering in either human lives or if human
lives were to alter into some kind of transhuman
or posthuman life. But I do think that these
pictures are very often another form of secular theodicy,
secular optimistic theodicy, because I strongly suspect that they
are. Excessively optimistic in what they think can be
achieved.
And uh you know, no, go ahead, go ahead,
sorry.
Uh, THE reason why I think that is because
if you prevent some kind of problems, I think
new problems are very likely to come in their
wake. So, if you think about the great success
that the developed world had for a while in
curtailing infectious diseases, so people weren't dying, let's say,
in infancy from infectious diseases or in in young
adulthood, but then they started dying of other things,
cancer and degenerative diseases, and If we manage to
cure those, then I think we'll find that people
start dying of something else. Because mortality and decay
and degeneration, these are all just parts of the
physical world, and I, I think that Many of
these people have just too optimistic a view about
how much that can be eradicated.
So do you think that I mean, even if
we could eliminate as much suffering as possible from
human life, even that wouldn't make it worth starting,
that it wouldn't make it worth creating new humans.
That I think is true because I think that
there would still be considerable suffering and so it
would never be in somebody, never actually be in
somebody's interest to be brought into existence. But that's
not to say that I'm opposed to our doing
what we can do to make lives better, because
that's certainly going to have value for existing people.
Uh, I would question though, the kind of utopian
pictures that are often presented to us. I just
think that they are very unlikely to be true.
The, the future will tell whether I'm right or
whether they're right. I, I'm not denying for the
record that some improvements can't take place. I just
doubt that death can be eradicated, that disease can
be eradicated. These are very ambitious projects that I
think are unlikely to be deliverable.
So, uh, let's talk a little bit about death
because of course it's one of the aspects of
our lives that is, uh, I think, or at
least for the time being unless there's a future,
uh there's a future, I don't know exactly when
where we will, we will not have to deal
with death anymore, but uh why does death matter
for our predicament?
Well, on my view, uh, death is bad. In
other words, life is bad, but so is death.
And that's one of the features that creates the
human predicament. It's either the rock or the hard
place. Now, of course, not all philosophers have this
view, and there's an ancient philosophical tradition, the Epicurean
tradition, which just denies that death is bad for
the, for the being who dies. And if that
view is correct, well, then it's The predicament is
not of the kind that I'm suggesting. It may
be still that it's hard for people to take
their own lives, but there would be, in a
sense, a cost-free exit. But I think that that
epicurean view is mistaken, not in a provable way.
It's not that I can give you. What's called
a knockdown argument to show that the Epicureans are
wrong, but I think on a balance of considerations,
which I do examine in the book, we should
reach the conclusion that death is bad and that
it's a pretty serious bad. That's not to say
that death is, is always the worst thing that
can happen to you. There are fates that are
worse than death. And I think that sometimes death
is going to be the lesser of two evils,
but it always comes at serious cost to the
being who dies, even if that cost is sometimes
less than the cost of remaining alive.
But assuming that there's no afterlife, there's no life
after death, um, and I think there's of course
very good reasons to assume that. Do you think
that uh death would be bad just as the
process itself, there is the the moment you go
through death, that would be the bad thing about
it. And then what comes after, since there's nothing
to experience, no suffering, also, of course, no pleasure,
but that isn't bad in itself or is the
whole thing bad.
This is what the debate with the epicurean rests
on, and the epicurean does say, precisely because you
will not experience anything after death, that it can't
be bad. The suggestion is that because you aren't
there when you die, when you're dead, it, it
can't be bad for you. And the challenge of
those wanting to respond to the epicurean is to
provide an explanation for how it could possibly be
bad for you if you no longer exist. And
the most common form of that argument is what's
called the deprivation account. What that says is that
the antemortem person, that is to say, the person
who existed before death, is deprived of the goods
that he or she would have had if life
had continued, uh, but is deprived of through, through
death. And of course, a lot, much more needs
to be said about the deprivation account. It needs
to be qualified in various ways, but I think
we can make sense of it. Now, we, we
do need to acknowledge that Ceasing to exist and
also coming into existence are very unusual kinds of
cases. They're not the usual kind of cases. Normally,
when something harms you, you exist in both of
the possible scenarios, and then one of these scenarios
is worse than the other one would have been.
And the question is, how do you deal with
these unusual cases? Do you Try to force them
into. Your ordinary concepts, or do you recognize that
because they're unusual kinds of cases, you need to
adapt your concepts to the unusual case? And my
view is that we should take that latter path.
We should not presume that Uh, the unusual cases
have to fit our usual concepts. If we need
to alter our concepts in some way to account
for unusual cases, then that's probably the wisest thing
to do.
Mhm, BUT if I understood something that you said
earlier correctly, then there are at least a few
situations where death is not as bad as going
on living because of the kind of situation that
people or a particular person finds themselves in.
Correct. So, let's take that deprivation view. So, if
the, the badness of your death depends on the
extent to which you are deprived of future goods,
we can well imagine people, because there are millions
of such people whose quality of life has degenerated
to the point that they cannot reasonably expect any
future good. So their death doesn't deprive them of
future good. All it does is deprive them of
future bads. And so then you might say that
death is the lesser of two evils for them.
Uh, NOW, my own view about the badness of
death is that it doesn't rest only on deprivation,
uh, that another reason why death is bad is
that it annihilates us. That is to say, it
brings an irreversible end to our existence. And my
own view is that that is a bad in
itself, so that even when you are deprived of
no goods by your death, You are still annihilated,
and so it's still an evil, even if it's
the lesser of two evils because continued existence would
bring you so much pain and suffering.
And do you think that immortality, if it would
be possible, of course, uh, could be better?
So again, as you, as you've intimated, the immortality
is a deeply hypothetical scenario. I just I think
it's impossible for us to be immortal, but I
think under appropriately described circumstances, the possibility or the
option of immortality would be better than enforced mortality.
And, um, how, OK, so, uh, what about, for
example, uh, the fact that, uh, the suffering that
we experience in our uh limited lives. Would probably
exist, we would probably experience it forever because we
would be immortal and also the possibility that some
thinkers, some philosophers raise of us reaching a state
of complete boredom.
Good. So, those are the kinds of concerns that
people raise. Let me take them, well, let me
take them in reverse order. The, the boredom argument
was a famous argument advanced by Bernard Williams, and
there've been a number of philosophical responses to that,
which I think plausibly suggests that if you had
enough diversity of interests so that you could move
between them, you could Having one kind of hobby
for 20 or 30 years and then move on
to something else for a couple of decades and
then, if you had sufficient variety that you wouldn't
get bored. Already, in existing lives, having a diversity
of activities can stave off boredom, and I don't
see any reason why in principle, this couldn't go
on for a, uh, for a longer time. Perhaps
the more pressing objection is the one about our
lives containing suffering, and so, if we went on
forever, then there'd just be more and more and
more of it. Uh, AND here, I do think
it depends on how bad you think the annihilation
factor is. Uh, SO if you think that either
annihilation is not part of the badness of death,
or you think that there's only a very minor
interest in not being annihilated, then that's more readily
going to be overridden by suffering and the need
to avoid that suffering. But the more weight you
put on the badness of being annihilated, the more
suffering it's going to take in order to defeat
that interest. And I, I don't have a solution
to this. I can't prove to anybody about how
bad I think annihilation is. I, I do think
that our ordinary views are that annihilation is pretty
bad. It's possible that those views are mistaken, but
I think it's, uh, unlikely that, uh, that annihilation
is not bad at all. So we can, we
can sort of haggle about the details if you
accept the principle that annihilation is bad. But that
I think is where you're gonna get variation. In
terms of how much suffering makes makes it worth
not continuing a life.
So of course there's a very sensitive and delicate
subject that we have to address here. Related to
death and earlier we've already mentioned that there are
most certainly situations where it's better for people to
die than to go on living because of their
the awful situation they find themselves in. Um, DO
you think that suicide is always irrational, or do
you think that there are instances where suicide might
be, uh, justified?
So, one does need to be careful in speaking
about this topic because I do think that many
people who are suicidal are irrationally suicidal. OK. Uh,
BECAUSE I think what they're doing is they're either
underestimating the quality of their own life, or they're
underestimating how much they mean to other people, or
what they could contribute to the world. I've certainly
known people who have eventually taken their own lives,
of whom I think this is true. These were
very bright, talented people who had lots to contribute,
and they had insufficient sense of their self-worth. They
were underestimating, clearly underestimating the quality and the meaning
of their lives. And so, one has to be
very careful when one makes the claim that sometimes
suicide is rational and morally acceptable, that many of
the people who have suicidal instincts will assume that
they fall into that category. And I don't want
anybody to have that misperception. Of course. I, I
think the kinds of cases where, where suicide is
rational is when people really are an extremist, when
they're suffering from some kind of Terminal conditions. It's
not only terminal conditions, but I'm gonna focus on
the clearest kind of cases where continued life is
just going to bring suffering, and the only way
to avoid that is to be sedated to the
level of minimal consciousness or unconsciousness, and so there's
really no good to be derived from, from continued
existence. And when that's on the horizon, I think
that one can have discussions about rational suicide. When
you've got formalized procedures, when you've got, let's say,
countries that legalize medical assistance, I think important protections
get put in place, because people can now get
the assistance that they need, but they've also got
to go through some kind of process to get
that assistance. And I think getting that external perspective,
having your own sense of the quality of your
life tested as it were, by people who need
to convince themselves of the justification in in assisting
you, uh, that's a good kind of corrective to
people who might be too readily, uh, throwing up
their hands. And so, I want to be very
sympathetic to people who feel that the quality of
their lives is so bad that death is better
for them and they want to take their own
life, but at the same time, I want to
caution them against Possible mistakes that they're making and
the, the, the, the enormity and the finality of
a mistake of that kind. And so I do
think that people can profit from an external perspective,
from speaking to other trusted people, confidence, who can
speak to them without betraying them.
Yes, no, no, those are definitely very important things
to say. This is, uh, of course, as I
said, a very sensitive topic, uh, but, uh, let
me just ask you one more question about it,
by the way, uh, do you think, do you
think that we should morally condemn people who put
an end to their lives?
Usually not, because I, I think it takes a
lot to end one's own life. There's got to
be an enormous amount of subjective suffering there, and
whether or not that was based on a misperception
of reality, I think we should be sympathetic to
To the condition in which people found them, found
themselves. Now, there can be circumstances where I think
that a suicide and I'm I'm using the term
suicide as a noun to refer to the person
who takes their own life. I don't like the
word the the the the verb commit suicide, but
it suggests, uh, some kind of uh moral wrong.
Yeah, it sounds almost like a crime,
right? Well, it dates it dates from the time
when suicide was a crime. And so just like
you committed murder, you committed suicide. Uh, IT'S very
easy to fall into that kind of language, but
I do try to avoid it. So, there are
circumstances when the suicide, the person that who kills
himself or herself, is paying insufficient attention to the
interests of others. Uh, SO I'm thinking, for example,
about the Jeffrey Epstein case. Where he took his
own life and thereby deprived his victims of The
kind of closure that they needed through a trial
and uh again, I'm not underestimating the mental state
in which he must have been, uh, but at
the same time, it wasn't his only his interests
that counted there and sometimes somebody can prioritize their
own interests ahead of the legitimate interests of other
people.
Right, so how do you think people should deal
with their predicament then? I mean this human predicament
and all the facets of it that we've been
talking about. Uh, WHAT can we do about it
at the end of the day?
Well, that is a difficult question because one is
in this predicament and there's no real escape. I
do consider a number of strategies. These are really
typologies because I think that possible coping mechanisms really
exist on a spectrum. Uh, BUT, uh, two broad
kinds that I refer to are a, uh, pragmatic
optimism and a pragmatic, uh, pessimism. And the way
I characterize the pragmatic optimism. IS that you just
sort of ignore the bad parts and you Completely
obscure that from your consciousness and you focus only
on the good as a way of, of coping.
And my worry with that strategy is that it's
likely to also result in the kinds of harms
that excessively optimistic people are more likely to commit,
including Producing more people in the human predicament, because
if you're really filled with the joys of life
and you think this is all a wonderful enterprise,
you're much more likely to be producing more children
who are gonna find themselves in this predicament. And
so what I recommend instead is a kind of
a pragmatic pessimism. And so, you remain pessimistic in
the sense that you fully acknowledge all the bad
things about the predicament. Uh, BUT what you do
is you don't dwell on them. You distract yourself
from them. So instead of denying them, uh, you
distract yourself from them. That means you'll reflect on
them occasionally. You'll, you don't lose perspective. But you're
not dwelling on them so much that you actually
increase the amount of misery in your life, in
the lives of the people around you. Uh, THEY
don't, it doesn't inhibit your ability to create as
much meaning as you can. And so, the broad
kind of strategy that I would recommend is that
pragmatic pessimism.
And do you think that um through recognizing that
we all find ourselves in this predicament and all
the suffering that goes associated with it. Through compassion
and through moral acts of, for example, helping other
people, trying our best to alleviate the our human
predicament, I mean our own and the one of
other people that we could. In a limited way
give meaning to our lives.
I do think those things, yes. Look, I don't
wanna be one of those people that has a
sort of unqualified endorsement of compassion because I think
that sometimes compassion can be misplaced. Uh, SO, sometimes
people are doing so much damage to the people
around them that our appropriate response to the damage
doers. Shouldn't be primarily one of compassion. We can
have that strand to our thinking, but it may
be that what we need to do is prioritize
stopping them from doing the harm, uh, that they're
doing. Uh, BUT, uh, yes, I think that compassion
is a way, if, if done appropriately and with
the, in the right measure and Correctly directed is
one way in which we can improve the lot
of others and thereby also generate some meaning in
our own lives.
Great, so Doctor Bennett, let's end on that note
then, and the book is again The Human Predicament,
a Candid Guide to Life's Biggest Questions, and of
course I'm leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview. And look, thank you so
much again for coming on the show. As I
said at the beginning, this is already our 5th
conversation, and I'm always, it's always for me a
huge pleasure and honor to talk to you.
That's very kind. Thank you for inviting me again.
I always enjoy speaking with you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herz Agnon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and
Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel,
Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego
Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro,
Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel Pan
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith,
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers is are Webb, Jim Frank
Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro,
Al Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.